Add state resolution v2 post (#696)
matrix-org/matrix.org: gatsby/content/docs/2020-04-14-stateresv2.mdx

When resolving state, we adhere to the following guidelines:

1. Higher power levels should take precedence over lower ones, e.g. the actions of an administrator should overrule those of a moderator
2. Earlier events should be processed before later ones where possible

It's worth mentioning that concepts such as "earlier" and "later" are difficult to define in Matrix and this is a significant part of what makes state resolution difficult to do. In State Res v2, we have a couple of new concepts for defining when an event is "earlier" or "later" than another event - these are covered in the sections below on ordering events.

### Defining state

First of all, a state event is a Matrix event which contains a `state_key`. The state key defines _what_ the state applies to (or is often an empty string if the state should apply to the entire room). Examples of state events are `m.room.create`, `m.room.join_rules`, `m.room.power_level`, `m.room.member` etc.

> Given that state events are also a part of the room history, state can be different at different points in time. Therefore, the state at a specific event contains a snapshot of all state events that apply to the room at the time of that given event and won't include state events that came after it.

Author: Yep, updated to include that.

var incoming_edges: map(event_id -> integer)

for each full_conflicted_set as e:
    event_map[e.event_id] = e
    incoming_edges[e.event_id] = 0
```

The Matrix-specific details of our implementation of Kahn's algorithm lie in the tie-break between events. The tie-break ensures that we get a deterministic ordering and that we also meet our two guidelines from the beginning: that we will always try to prefer events from the more powerful, and we will always try to process older events first. When sorting, you can assert that **x &lt; y** by running the following tests in order:

1. The effective power level at **x** is greater than the effective power level at **y**
2. The event origin server timestamp of **x** is less than the event origin server timestamp of **y **(that is, event **x** is older than** y**)
3. The event ID of **x** is less than the event ID of **y**, as computed by a lexicographical comparison, as a fallback

To ensure that the algorithm is deterministic (that is, running in the same order) for a given set of inputs, we must ensure that the map of incoming edges has been sorted using the above rules before we do anything with it:

```

> func sorted_incoming_edges() as list(event):

Reviewer: In fact you use the `returns` syntax below.

    sort incoming_edges that x < y when:
        x.power_level > y.power_level or
            x.origin_server_ts < y.origin_server_ts or
        lexographic_compare(x.event_id, y.event_id) < 0
        return incoming_edges
```

Once the incoming edges have been sorted, iterate through the input list to count how many incoming edges each event has and update the incoming edges map with those values:

```
for each input_events as e:
    for each e.auth_events as a:
        incoming_edges[a.event_id] += 1
```

Then look for events that have no incoming edges and insert them into the beginning of the output list—note that we differ from a pure implementation of Kahn's algorithm here as we specifically require the incoming edges map to be sorted (as above):

```
while len(incoming_edges) > 0:

>     for each sorted_incoming_edges() as id -> count:

Author: The `id -> count` is `key -> value` (maybe I should just name them that?)

>     for each sorted_incoming_edges() as id -> count:

Reviewer: Hm, I think it's useful to name them so we know what value they correspond to.

Maybe `for each sorted_incoming_edges() as id, count:`?

>     for each sorted_incoming_edges() as id -> count:

Author: Done!

        if count == 0:
            output_event = (event_map[id], output_event...)

>     for each event.auth_events as auth_event:

Author: Should have been `event_map[id]`, fixed.

        incoming_edges[auth_event.event_id] -= 1

    remove(incoming_edges, id)
```

Each time we add a node into the output list, we can "remove" its outgoing edges. This means that every auth event referred to by this event has one less incoming edge. Once it has been exhausted, we also remove the event from the incoming edge map, so that we won't try to process it again.

Now we repeat the process, continuously, until the algorithm eventually exhausts the entire incoming edges map. Once the map is empty, all edges have been removed and the earliest events will appear at the beginning of the output list.

The output list is now sorted such that all referred events now appear before the events that refer to them.

### Iteratively apply resolved control events

> Now that our control events have been sorted into topological order, where the first events in the list are the "oldest", we can now start to layer these resolved control events on top of the partial state.

Author: Yep, fixed.

> To update the partial state, start at the oldest event and loop through the list, authing each event against the current partial state. If the event passes auth checks then update the partial state to include the event before moving onto the next iteration:

Author: I've elaborated on this a little bit.

> To update the partial state, start at the oldest event and loop through the list, authing each event against the current partial state. If the event passes auth checks then update the partial state to include the event before moving onto the next iteration:

Reviewer: Mm, I'm still wondering how `auth_against_partial_state` works. Is it defined anywhere already that you can point to?

I know it's just given the partial state, ensure the state event is allowed to go in, but what's a rough algorithm for it? Just go through the list of auth events and ensure they're authed, and that they auth the given event?

> To update the partial state, start at the oldest event and loop through the list, authing each event against the current partial state. If the event passes auth checks then update the partial state to include the event before moving onto the next iteration:

Author: That's pretty much it - the usual auth checks, but using the `partial_state` as the source of the auth events. I've added a link and a little more text.

```
var resolved_power_level_event: partial_state["m.room.power_level"][""] as event
var power_level_mainline:       list(event)

func mainline_iterate(e as event):
    power_level_mainline += e
    for each e.auth_events as auth_event:
        if auth_event.event_type == "m.room.power_level":
            mainline_iterate(auth_event)
```

We refer to the time period between any two given power level events as an _epoch_.

In the below illustration, the "resolved" event is the event that appears in the partial state from the previous section.

![drawing showing partial state example](/docs/guides/img/2020-04-14-stateresv2-2.svg)

### Mainline ordering of normal state events

Since the mainline will be ordered based on when the power level changes happened, and other state events use power level events as auth events, it is possible to sort the order of normal state events based on which mainline power level event they most closely refer to, or by definition, which epoch the event happened in.

> Note that events may appear that refer to power level events which don't appear in the mainline, in which case it is necessary to step through the power level events iteratively until you encounter one that is on the mainline. This is referred to as the _closest mainline event_:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that events may appear that refer to power level events which don't appear in the mainline, in which case it is necessary to step through the power level events iteratively until you encounter one that is on the mainline. It is referred to as the _closest mainline event_:
```

```
func is_in_mainline(e as event) returns boolean:
    if e in power_level_mainline:
        return true
    else:

>         return false

Reviewer: If you already assume `e in power_level_mainline` is define, then this function feels superfluous?

Author: Yep, you're right. Removed it.

func get_closest_mainline_event(e as event) returns event:
    var closest_mainline_event: event

    func closest_iterate(e as event):

>     if is_in_mainline(e):

Reviewer: Needs an extra indent.

            closest_mainline_event = e
        else:
            for each e.auth_events as auth_event:
                if auth_event.event_type == "m.room.power_level":
                    closest_iterate(auth_event)

    closest_iterate(e)

>     return closest_mainline_event

Reviewer: I feel like you don't need `closest_iterate` and you could just make `get_closest_mainline_event` a recursive function. Is the reason you make an extra function because you don't want to run `closest_mainline_event = event` over and over?

Author: I just felt like this was a clearer way of demonstrating the bounds of recursion, and because it's pretty much how it was implemented in gomatrixserverlib.

Reviewer: Fair enough, I agree that it's pretty clear code :)

```

> In the following illustration, _Event B_ happens in a more recent epoch than _Event A_ as the closest mainline event referred to by _Event A_ is older than the closest mainline event referred to by _Event B_:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following illustration, _Event B_ happens in a more recent epoch than _Event A_ as the closest mainline event referred to by _Event A_ is older (closer to the room's create event) than the closest mainline event referred to by _Event B_:
```

![drawing showing an example of mainline ordering](/docs/guides/img/2020-04-14-stateresv2-3.svg)

To sort the events, we use a method very similar to that used in the reverse topological ordering of control events, only instead of initially sorting by power level, we use the position of the nearest mainline power level event on the mainline. When sorting, you can assert that **x &lt; y** by running the following tests in order:

> 1. The closest mainline event to **x** is later in the mainline then the closest mainline event to **y** (for example, in the above diagram, **A** is less than **B **as **B **refers to a more recent mainline power level event)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The closest mainline event to **x** is later in the mainline then the closest mainline event to **y** (for example, in the above diagram, **A** is less than **B** as **B** refers to a more recent mainline power level event)
```

> 1. The closest mainline event to **x** is later in the mainline then the closest mainline event to **y** (for example, in the above diagram, **A** is less than **B **as **B **refers to a more recent mainline power level event)

Reviewer: > The closest mainline event to **x** is later in the mainline then the closest mainline event to **y**

So `later` is defined as being older? It's just I'd imagine `later` being further along in the event list, but we order the list such that older events are at the beginning of the list.

Author: `later` is newer. Maybe that's ambiguous?

2. The event origin server timestamp of **x** is less than the event origin server timestamp of **y**
3. The event ID of **x** is less than the event ID of **y**, as computed by a lexicographical comparison

To ensure that the algorithm is deterministic (that is, running in the same order) for a given set of inputs, we ensure that the normal state events have been sorted using the above criteria:

```
func sorted_normal_state_events() as list(event):

>     sort normal_events that x < y when:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    sort normal_events where x < y when:
```

        x.position_on_mainline < y.position_on_mainline or
            x.origin_server_ts < y.origin_server_ts or

>         lexographic_compare(x.event_id, y.event_id) < 0

Reviewer: This line is lacking some indents.

        return normal_events
```

In the event that multiple candidate events refer to the same mainline power level event, the remaining two tests will allow the sorting to be deterministic.

### Iteratively apply resolved normal state events

Now that our normal state events have been sorted into mainline order, where the first events in the list are the "oldest", we can now start to layer these resolved normal state events on top of the _partial state_.

Just as with the control events, each normal state event should be authed against the partial state, before applying the valid events to the partial state:

```
for each sorted_normal_state_events() as e:
    if auth_against_partial_state(e):

>         partial_state[e.event_type()][e.state_key()] = e

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        partial_state[e.event_type][e.state_key] = e
```

```

Any event that fails to auth against the current partial state should be ignored and should not be applied to the partial state.

### Re-apply unconflicted state

Now that all of the events from the original conflicted set have been resolved and applied, we complete one final pass over the partial state by re-applying the original unconflicted set. Ordinarily, nothing from the conflicted set should overwrite anything from the unconflicted set, but pulling in auth events may bring in additional state.

Reapply the unconflicted state events onto the partial state to complete the state:

```
for each unconflicted_events as e:

>     partial_state[e.event_type()][e.state_key()] = e

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    partial_state[e.event_type][e.state_key] = e
```

Now that our control events have been sorted into reverse topological order, where the first events in the list are the "oldest", we can now start to layer these resolved control events in order to build the partial state.

> To build up the partial state, start at the oldest event and loop through the list, [performing auth checks on each event](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1#authorization-rules) by using the current `partial_state` as an allowed set of auth events (with this behaviour defined as `auth_against_partial_state` in the below example). It is expected that `partial_state` is an empty list for the first iteration, as the oldest event (which is the room create event) does not require auth events. The partial state (and, by extension, the selection of allowed auth events) will grow with each iteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build up the partial state, start at the oldest event and loop through the list, [performing auth checks on each event](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1#authorization-rules) by using the current `partial_state` as an allowed set of auth events. We define this process as the function `auth_against_partial_state`.

It is expected that `partial_state` is an empty list for the first iteration, as the oldest event (which is the room create event) does not require auth events. The partial state (and, by extension, the selection of allowed auth events) will grow with each iteration.
```
